The average coffee producer has a very tiny farm.
It's very common here for producers to have about a hectare,
hectare and a half of coffee farming land.
And these are just some statistics taken from the FNC website,
the Tecumseh Nacional de Cafe,
to give you an idea of how many cherries per hectare you can get
in exportable bags and then the typical varieties that we have here in Colombia.
Típica, Bufo, Maripojipe, Tabi, and then Artura Castillo is what we have, what we're processing right now.
This is also to show you, I love this picture, it's taken from here, it's from taken up close to our
house, to see the steepness of the mountain, the terrain is incredibly steep, so it's really hard
to mechanize. All of the work has to be done by hand, and you can see little patchwork quilts of
all of this, you know, tiny little farms owned by completely different owners. It's a very
parceled landscape.
This is some more information about a typical producer. So again, a little less than one and
a half hectares. How much that cherry, about how much that cherry would, how much cherry that
amount of land would give you. This is about the price right now. So we were talking about this
We bought it about 85 cents per kilo of cherry.
And then you can also see the price of green coffee.
But what's interesting about these statistics too is that the price of fertilizer is almost half of your cost.
Fertilizer is incredibly expensive and it's a huge, huge input for coffee producers.
producers. And, okay, so here, so your annual income from that amount of land would be about
$9,000 per year, which is not very much when half of your cost is going to, going to fertilizer
and then also, one of the things that's a little fuzzy too is that the most expensive
thing for coffee production is labor. And when you have these really small farms, well,
So you usually have your wife and you have your kids and you have a lot of family members.
So it's a lot of undocumented labor, a lot of unaccounted for labor.
So you don't really have a good idea of how much it costs to produce coffee
because a lot of people don't know how to value their time or they don't know how to account for their time.
So it's just something to keep in mind.
And the other thing we were talking about is a typical producer, a typical picker, sorry,
can make about maybe $10 to $20 per day picking coffee,
depending on how-- the variety and how charged,
meaning how much cherry there is on a particular tree.
So it's very little.
Just thinking about how much actually
makes it back to the producer and then actually
makes it back to the baker compared to our coffee prices,
just to give some context.
So I was wondering if either Matt or Caleb
wants to share any statistics about Thailand,
about how different it is there, any similarities?
Not to put you on the spot.
It's just kind of a time to share.
Yeah, it is mostly small farms.
OK, yeah.
It's mostly very, I think even smaller farms than that.
Like in the area where we are,
the average farm is about two, 3,000 trees.
And,
fertilizer isn't nearly that much
because a lot of people, what they'll do
is they'll raise pigs and then just use the pig manure
for the fertilizer.
So like, they'll have a coffee farm
And then up, like at the top of the dovetail side,
they'll have their pigs and then the fertilizer
is easy to just distribute down.
So, let's see, this year the cherry price
went up quite a bit.
It's over a dollar, maybe about $1.20, $1.30 a kilo
So it's usually around, it's usually less than a dollar, but it went up a lot this year.
So other statistics seem pretty similar.
So the reality of coffee farmers here is very similar to the reality that you're used to.
Julie, do you want to share?
Sure.
Very different.
Do you mind coming up?
Yeah.
So in Hawaii, labor is very, very competitive.
For ag laborers, you're at least looking at your standard minimum wage.
In Hawaii, it's $10.10 right now per hour.
So a lot of farmers prefer to pay their pickers by weight.
So they'll offer a price per pound in cherry weight,
and actually that can be even better for some pickers
pickers because they can make way above minimum wage if they're very good at
picking. So in that situation pretty much everyone wins. Cherries come off the tree.
There's usually a fair amount of sorting. Right now it's a very high competition
for cherry with the recent introduction of Calpamulipras, Roya, and I believe I
heard that the farmers or buyers for cherry are paying probably around five
dollars per kilo for raw cherry. So pretty high.
Yeah. So I get that question a lot. Why is, because we know that Hawaii coffee has,
it's very expensive or much more expensive than coffee from Guatemala or Honduras.
So people say, or they ask, is it 15 times better than coffee from somewhere else?
Is it actually that much better? No, it's good coffee, but the labor is a
a completely different animal.
Paying somebody $10 an hour, paying somebody $10
for a whole day, that multiplied makes a big difference.
Cecil, do you have anything to add about the makeup?
Just a touch on the picket.
We tried jaw picking.
It doesn't work.
It's a super challenge to monitor the pickers.
They go from this tree to that tree to that tree.
They strip the trees.
They break off the branches.
They come down with coffee that looks more green than red
just to make up for it.
You don't have a strong culture of picking.
It's more...
I just took out some pickers down.
For a 30 kilo box unit, you get $67 at the gate.
If you were to process that, you'd get upwards of $320 for the same amount.
A bag of fertilizer is $100.
So that comes out, and the labor is usually around $20 a day to $25 a day.
So when you have the leave on the fertilizer and the cut, but you can't pick dry, it's difficult.
So it's better you have slow pickers that pick properly.
But look at that. So I would say that Blue Mountain Coffee is on par with Kona Coffee,
and yet you're still paying very similar labor prices to some places like Colombia, $20 a day
versus $200 a day. That's interesting. This is $20 a day. Yeah, $20 a day.
Something else that's very unique in Colombia is that because there's so many regions and
the difference in altitude, somewhere there will be cherries all year round. I guess there's like
a little pocket in August where there's no coffee but 11 months of the year somewhere in Colombia
coffee's coming in and so that has a lot of advantages in terms of making you know coffee
really important for the economy that it's kind of this constantly moving machine. One of the
disadvantages oh well and you can see this picture I really like because you can see you have red
cherries you have green and you have flowering all at the same time so you have this like cycle
which makes it very hard for quality because you do need more skilled pickers because you have this
variation. And if you're not skilled, your those flowers are really easy to not grow. So you can be
picking and kind of ruining the next season's crop because you're trying to do these things at the
same time. So that makes that's very much a challenge. Another challenge I've noticed of
this kind of rhythm is that there's very little downtime. And so a lot of the producers when I
work in Guatemala, when I work in Honduras, when I work in other places that have like a definite
harvest season, there is the off time where you can make investments, where you can make improvements,
where you can do maintenance. But in a lot of these places, maintenance and improvements are
really on the back burner because there's not a lot of time to catch up. There's just a lot of coffee
most of the year. So that's just something to keep in mind as well.
This is another thing just to keep talking about this context of picking is about half of the cost of the production of coffee
and fertilizer is another quarter so it's really significant.
There's not a lot of margin left and what we saw from the other slide as well is that it's very difficult to make a living.
So coffee producers in Colombia very rarely, they can't really make a living from coffee only.
have to have other crops, they've got to have other inputs, because coffee in and of itself
is a very difficult way to make a living. And one of the things that we were talking about here
in the Spanish group with Valeria and Alejandra, as they were saying, because of the troubles in
Brazil this year, the price of cherry went up really high, a lot of producers got really excited
that the cherry price went up, but also the fertilizer price went up, and then by the time
a lot of producers got around to planting their more coffee because they were excited about the
second.
The first FTC we tried to record it because a lot of people, it was still closer to COVID,
so a lot of people wanted to have like a digital version to make it watch because they couldn't
travel. So we tried to film a lot of this and it was just with the dogs barking and the motorcycles
and the traffic it didn't work out. But anyway, so what they were commenting on was that the
price of cherry went up, a lot of producers were planting more coffee, and now the price of cherry
has come down, it's more destabilized, the Colombian peso has been devalued against a dollar
a lot, but the price of fertilizer didn't come down also. So the price of fertilizer stayed really
high, but the cherries come down and it's just kind of like cannibalizing cycle that is a really
unfortunate like pattern that doesn't seem to be breaking. So something to keep in mind as well.
This is also to think about the view of like specialty coffee or these beautiful beneficios.
So, Renata was asking me about Diego,
and he's got one of the most beautiful beneficios.
It's very, very showy and very technologically advanced.
And I think that gives a lot of consumers
a skewed vision of Colombia.
I think that is a very unicorn,
half of a one percenter who can do that.
Most, this down here, the most,
for these small producers, that's what you've got.
That's a turd refrigerator that they're using as a thing.
Like, it's a lot of really small producers that process their own cherry into cold coffee
and either sell it wet or try to dry it and then sell it that way.
So it's really about speed and just getting to the final product so that you can get some
money.
In specialty, there are some improvements.
This is the mill that I worked at when I met Ceo Estienne.
So at least it's indoors and it's, you know, tiled instead of this outdoor kind of random
pulper.
What else?
That's all I want to say about this.
I just wanted to give you that kind of context that most of the producers are really small
and most of the producers are just kind of DIY with very old equipment.
And that what you see in these beautiful pictures is the exception, not the rule of coffee production.
The other thing I find fascinating is that even though there are 33 co-ops and 530 buying
stations, there's really only three dry mills in the country, in like all of Colombia.
And so all of this coffee gets funneled into these like three points.
So you can think about all those half a million producers and all of that coffee and all those
tiny lots really getting funneled into these three outlets.
And so that also creates a lot of difficulty in the specialty coffee industry because a
lot of coffees get blended, maybe not on purpose, maybe some on purpose, but it's really difficult
to have that traceability, especially on smaller lots, because you send something in and you're
not sure where it went and if the coffee you get back is the coffee that you gave them.
It's a really big barrier for a lot of producers to kind of try and find that outside market.
So there's a lot of ways in which the FNC is helpful in terms of controlling and supporting
the coffee industry, and there's still a lot of ways that it's kind of, like I said, cannibalizing
and really getting in its way, I think, long term.
Just really thinking about the long term sustainability.
It's very short term.
It's very like, all right, let's just get through this week and get through this month,
and not really thinking about the long-term viability of the industry.
Yes.
So this is specific to what we're working on.
So these are the numbers for FTC2.
So we got 450 kilos of cherry.
Today we actually got like 500, so we got a little bit more cherry.
So here you can see how much our yield is going to be.
So the reason I wanted to include this for non-coffee producers is to have an idea of how much coffee actually
how much cherry it takes to make a little bit of coffee.
So all of that work, all of those hours of us sorting and all the work that we're gonna do this week and then the
hopefully not but potentially weeks of drying.
At the end we're gonna get one bag, one 60 kilo bag
of coffee, of green coffee. So there's a lot of waste in this product. There's a lot of coffee that goes,
a lot of parts of the coffee that go unused. It takes a lot of coffee to make a little bit of coffee.
And so you're just some of the, if we, this is like what we spent in Cherry, that's how much we
bought it for, and if we were able to dry it and sell it dry, we could make a little bit more. And
And then again, if we sold it in the specialty market, maybe we could get that much.
So it sort of seems like pretty viable.
Like our cherry price to our sale price, maybe it could be a business.
But that doesn't count again, cutting it in half for the fertilizer and then the labor
and everything that goes into actually producing this cup of coffee.
This is just kind of numbers.
So it's a difficult game.
And so the other thing is showing here is that for we need five and a half, 5.5 kilos of cherry
to come up with one kilo of exportable coffee.
So that's after we've sorted out all the floaters, after we sorted out all the insects, all the greens that you guys have taken out.
And then even then as we continue to dry, there'll be more things taken out.
There's many steps where we keep kind of polishing the coffee.
So it takes a lot of coffee and then there's again, most of it is waste.
is the pulp, is the mucilage, is the parchment, is the silverskin. There's a lot of parts that go
that we don't use. So I think about this a lot when people say, "Well, we should pay more for coffee."
And absolutely true, we should pay more for coffee. But there's all of these other parts of coffee
that we're not using. I wonder if there's like something that we can do for the four-fifths that
we throw away instead of saying, "Well, let's just pay for that one-fifth more. Let's do both. Let's
pay more for that one-fifth and let's do something with those four-fifths." So I've seen some companies
that are making like coffee flours, like flour like to make cookies and goods, to try and buy
some of that cascara. I know the parchment can be used as a fuel, people burn it, but I still feel
like there's not enough innovation in this part of the industry. There's not enough people that
are trying to do something with this. We're just sort of accepting all of this waste and yeah.
Just to give you an idea of, you know, most of the producers and the exporters know these statistics,
that Columbia is the third largest producer in the world.
What I find interesting about this is that, well, Vietnam is mostly Robusta.
So when we're talking about Arabica, Columbia really is number two in terms of world production and the importance of it.
So when you think about in the world, most of our coffee is coming from these two countries,
And in the world, like the coffee that's coming, these producers are not able to make a living
because they have such small plots and the prices are so poor and the fertilizer is so
expensive and we just, and then there's no, there's no, there's no answers to this.
It's just like, okay, we're just going to like keep going until like the wheels fall
off I feel like and then we'll like figure it out then.
I don't know.
It's just, you know, it's a really frustrating part of the industry because there's so much
that we love about coffee and this is important for me for like the context of the event.
Like there's all of these beautiful parts that we get to share and I just feel like we don't,
we like that balance is not there. We're not talking enough about the sustainability of like
the lives of the people making the coffee. We're like oh sustainability of the forest and making
sure that we have shade trees. Like but what about the people? There's, it's not sustainable for the
people and that's not even talking about the shortage of labor either. So it's like all of
of these things I think should be kind of taken into account when we have these conversations.
Is it actually ethical to keep forcing people to make coffee? Because not at this rate for these places.
So that was just a context of like Colombia, where you are, how much coffee we're going to be
working with, how much, you know, something to keep in mind also, like I said, it's just the
waste, how much of it takes and where does that waste go. Something that's that
I'll point out again tomorrow, but when we're pulping the coffee we we're gonna
be pulping, taking the cascara to one side and then keeping the parchment and
then some of that sometimes that gets composted. That takes a lot of effort.
Sometimes it's just thrown back into the farm just like semi-composted like it
just kind of goes back but it's not a great method. And then most of the time
It's not really that effort to separate it. And so even here in this
hotel
They have a pulper down by the river and the tradition is just you just pulp it
It goes into the river just goes into the water supply and even here you'll see the pulper just go straight into the river
I don't know if I included them here. I also had some pictures of my time in Burundi where we're using
the river water to pull and process the coffee and in the same picture upstream
there's like a couple of boys just like bathing and bathing and washing their
clothes in the river that we're using to pull coffee and at first my my the
reason I took that picture was because I was thinking as a microbiologist I'm
like our water is a source of contamination like I gotta figure out
how to get them a better water source and it just it took me way too long to
flip that and say no this is their drinking water this is your using water
We're using their processing water.
We're contaminating their water.
They're not contaminating my processing water.
So it's just this, like--
again, we have all these very rustic practices for coffee.
And I think a lot of times, we're just getting really
carried away with the technology of brewing and the
things that are exciting, and forgetting how little
technology we have at the source, and how little
innovation there is at this point.
It's still very manual.
We're still picking by hand.
And I'm like, make some, I don't know, drones or something.
Like, let's put some effort on this side.
But again, that's not my specialty.
So now, the reason you're here, microbiology.
So part of the context of this week
is there's so much confusion
in terms of how we talk about processing.
And it's such a rich source for producers
to have some agency,
for producers to differentiate their copy.
Like it's such a tool that's very underutilized.
Here's something that producers can do to stand out,
but it's very confusing.
And so many people are lost on both ends.
Producers call me and they're like,
"I was asked for a double carbonic maceration.
I don't know what that is."
And then roasters ask me,
"Well, I received this like semi-washed natural.
I don't know what it is."
What are they talking about?
So it's a little bit of the blind leading the blind.
And so in addition to all of these labels
that are somewhat confusing,
and all of the other things that are kind of
coming on top of that, right?
Thermo shock, all of the red, purple, black honeys,
white honeys, hydro honeys.
I think that it's important,
like I'm not here to make a dictionary.
I don't want to define these terms.
I want producers to be creative.
I want producers to come up with cool names.
I want all of this weird stuff to happen,
but I want producers to be able to defend their choices
and to defend, like, I called it this because of this.
This is what lactic means here.
This is why I called it anaerobic.
Right now I'm seeing a little too much copy/paste.
This is what this person said.
I'm just gonna do what they did.
And then when you ask them, they're like, I don't know.
I put it under water.
It's anaerobic.
So the point isn't to police naming.
The point is to give you confidence and to give the producers that are here confidence
as to why I'm naming it this way.
And even if everybody has a different definition to like stand really firm and say,
I called it this because of this and this is my understanding.
So I'm not trying to eliminate these names or say that any of them are bad.
It's just why.
Just being, again, having that confidence.
So the way that I look at coffee processing
is 100% influenced by my background in winemaking.
And these two pictures are both places where I worked.
Opus One, this is a vineyard.
And then Cliff Laney is the winery.
And when I show this picture of Opus One
to most coffee producers, they find it very foreign
to have neat rows, very aligned, nothing in the middle,
very clean and no shade, just completely uniform.
And the other thing to point out is
that wineries are very clean, very beautiful places.
They are showpieces.
Even a very mid-tier, smaller winery
will still treat their space this way.
And there's not that same concern
or that same energy put into most coffee mills.
And I think that's definitely changing.
I don't think they need to go to that extreme.
But it's something to keep in mind,
that we want to process coffee like wine.
But again, we're still not treating it holistically
like we do wine.
And the other part that's funny is when I show this,
to most producers, they're like, I don't know what that is,
unless you're in Brazil.
In Brazil, it's flat.
It's uniform.
It's mechanically harvested.
So Brazil producers are very, very familiar with this.
no shade, completely exposed.
And I've seen some farms in Hawaii, too,
that are very uniform, very aesthetically pleasing as well.
And they're very nice.
So I started in coffee in 2014.
But this is me shuttling out a tank of grapes in Napa.
And this is shuttling, mixing some coffee.
So it's a different product, grapes and coffee.
But there's a lot of principles that we can apply.
There's a lot of winemaking principles.
There's a lot of fundamentals that translate
from one product to the other.
So in terms of processing and doing fermentations,
I have 15 years of experience doing this type of work.
This is also to give you an idea of context
of the different countries that I've worked in
and the different scenarios and scales,
Because I get so much resistance of, well, that works in Kenya,
but it doesn't work in Guatemala.
Or that works over there, but it doesn't work here.
And yes, countries are different,
and we need to respect that.
But there's so much fundamental basics
that translate region, that translate altitude,
that translate variety.
So that's what we're going to focus on.
So this is my favorite quote.
It's an economist, Lionel Robbins said,
we all talk about the same things,
but we have not yet agreed what it is we are talking about.
I think this is really, really true for fermentation.
I think a lot of us use the word fermentation
and we mean very different things,
or it means very different things kind of culturally
or just by language.
I think there's a lot of challenges
in all the different languages that we speak in coffee.
So like I mentioned before, we have very different levels here.
We have surgeons.
We have very educated people that went to medical school,
people that are getting their masters.
And we have coffee lovers.
And so I don't have a lot of background in coffee.
So just being a little bit patient with some
of these basics, like we're just setting up the foundation
so that everybody's on the same page from all
of these different backgrounds.
So this is going to start very basic,
but we'll pick up.
And this is to give you an idea of,
okay, we have natural and we have washed coffee.
And these two forms are the most flavor difference
that we've known.
These are kind of the beginnings
of how we can process coffee,
what we can do with this coffee cherry.
And we both know that these two methods
have very different flavor results.
If I do something different to my coffee,
I'm gonna get a different flavor in my cup.
So the first thing I really want to break the bad habit of is saying that a wet process
is a washed.
I've seen so many websites and so many labels use that word interchangeably, wet and washed.
Because they both have to do with water, so I can see sort of the confusion of, oh, wet
washed process.
But wet process is defined by the pulping step.
It has nothing to do with water.
So you can have your cherry and then you say, "Are we going to pulp it or not?"
Meaning, "Are we going to remove the skin?"
If no, then it's a natural and it's a dry process.
It still has its skin, dry process, natural.
If we remove the pulp, then most likely it's a washed, but it's also a wet.
It's a wet process.
So we can have a cherry that we pulp without water.
can we just pump it and expose the music?